WIP: First draft of HIPE for plugin helpers (#162)
hyperledger/indy-hipe: text/0162-plugin-removal-helpers/README.md

Removing the plugin has three important consequences:
* The data stored on the custom ledger created by the plugin will be deleted.
* The audit ledger will no longer be able to obtain the root hash of any custom ledgers from the plugin.
* Any authorization rules (auth_rules) on the config ledger that define fees as being necessary to authorize writes to the domain ledger can no longer be handled by the plugin.

The first consequence is intended. This HIPE proposes feature to address the remaining two consequences to ensure that the network remains functional after the plugin is removed.

We include both features in the same HIPE because they share a common motivation and are likely to be used together.

## Frozen Ledgers
[frozen-ledgers]: #frozen-ledgers

### Tutorial
[frozen-ledgers-tutorial]: #frozen-ledgers-tutorial

If a ledger has been created, but will never be used, it can be frozen. The LEDGERS_FREEZE transaction will record the root hashes of one or more ledgers, and perpetually use those hashes when computing audit ledger validity. This has two important advantages:

> * It preserves the ability to do rolling updates. If an update removes a plugin which includes custom ledgers, consensus would be interrupted and new transactions would not be able to be ordered until all nodes completed the update. This is because updated nodes would not be able to process new transactions that were ordered by the non-updated nodes. But if we freeze all ledgers associated with the plugin, we can do rolling updates because new transactions related to the plugin will be impossible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* It preserves the ability to do rolling updates. If an update removes a plugin which includes custom ledgers, consensus would be interrupted in case of new plugin related transactions during a rolling update. This is because updated nodes would not be able to process new transactions that were ordered by the non-updated nodes. But if we freeze all ledgers associated with the plugin, we can do rolling updates because new transactions related to the plugin will be impossible.
```

* It allows the removal of old plugins. Frozen ledgers can be removed and there will be no left over data from the removed plugin. The removal of old plugins will also help reduce the cost of keeping the network stable and secure.

Freezing ledgers requires the following workflow:
* Upgrade all nodes to a version of Indy that supports frozen ledgers.
* Send a LEDGERS_FREEZE transaction for the ledgers that you want to drop.
* Upgrade all nodes to remove the plugin.
* Execute a migration script to drop the ledgers.

Permissions around the LEDGERS_FREEZE transaction are managed in the auth_rules with a default permission requiring the approval of three trustees ([the same default auth_rule for upgrading the ledger](https://github.com/hyperledger/indy-node/blob/master/docs/source/auth_rules.md)).

### Reference
[frozen-ledgers-reference]: #frozen-ledgers-reference

If a ledger is frozen it can be used neither for reading nor for writing. It will not be caught up by new nodes and can be safely removed. Default ledgers such as the domain, config, pool, and audit ledgers cannot be frozen.

> Implementation notes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Implementation notes:
```

* Implementation of this feature is possible because the catchup of the config ledger happens before catchup of other ledgers.

> * We were nervous that replacing a ledger with a frozen ledger hash would break foreign keys in auth_rules, but our testing showed that this is not an issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* We were nervous that removing transactions would break foreign keys in auth_rules, but our testing showed that this is not an issue.
```

* Frozen ledgers cannot be unfrozen, but dropped ledgers can be recreated with a different ledger ID.

> Implementation steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Implementation steps:
```

1. Implement LEDGERS_FREEZE transaction handler that will write information about frozen ledger to state
2. Implement GET_FROZEN_LEDGERS transaction handler that will return information about frozen ledgers from state
3. Add dynamic validation to all handlers: check if the ledger is frozen
4. Update audit logic by taking into account the root hashes of frozen ledgers

> 5. Fix catch up to not catch up frozen ledgers **TODO: mirror requests or not?**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Fix catch up to not catch up frozen ledgers.
```

We've figured out that it's not necessary.

#### State schema:
There will be a key in CONFIG_LEDGER that will store a list of frozen ledgers in the following format:

```
2:FROZEN_LEDGERS = [
    <ledger_id>: {
        ledger: <ledger_root_hash>,
       	state: <state_root_hash>,
       	seq_no: <last_seq_no>
    },
    ...
]
```

#### New transactions:

Freeze ledgers that have the provided IDs:
```
LEDGERS_FREEZE {
    LEDGERS_IDS: [int]
}
```

Return frozen ledgers and their root hashes.
```
GET_FROZEN_LEDGERS
```

### Drawbacks
[frozen-ledgers-drawbacks]: #frozen-ledgers-drawbacks

> The LEDGERS_FREEZE transaction allows removal of the plugin that created the ledger if the ledger was never used and the hash on the audit ledger never changed. Otherwise, the plugin will need to remain installed to allow historical transactions to replayed with the correct ledger hash.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The LEDGERS_FREEZE transaction allows removal of the plugin that created the ledger if the ledger was never used and the hash on the audit ledger never changed. Otherwise, the plugin will need to remain installed to allow historical transactions to be replayed with the correct ledger hash.
```

All questions raised during the development of this proposal have been answered in this draft of the proposal.

## Default Fee Handlers
[default-fee-handler]: #default-fee-handler

### Tutorial
[default-fee-handler-tutorial]: #default-fee-handler-tutorial

[Indy Authorization Rules](https://github.com/hyperledger/indy-node/blob/master/docs/source/requests.md#auth_rule) provide a flexible way of authorizing write transactions to the domain ledger. This authorization can [depend on the payment of fees tracked by ledger plugins](https://github.com/sovrin-foundation/libsovtoken/blob/master/doc/fees.md).

Because Indy currently has no native concept of fees, if a plugin that implemented fees is removed, historical transactions can no longer be validated and will prevent new nodes from catching up on the ledger. In many cases it is sufficient to know that the historical transactions were valid at the time of writing. In these cases a default fee handler can approve the historical transactions.

### Reference
[default-fee-handler-reference]: #default-fee-handler-reference

The default fee handler is implemented in a new class ...

> **TODO**

Reviewer: The default fee handler will be a copy of sovtoken fee handler with the validation disabled.

Transaction handler consists of two parts: validation logic (static and dynamic) and business logic.

For new transactions validation is performed. During the catchup process, no validation is performed (because since the transaction is in the ledger it means that validation it was already performed and we don't need to do it twice).

So, if we copy the handler and disable validation, it will allow catchup but will not allow new transactions.

Business logic for fees related transactions must remain the same. Enabling of those transactions and the logic that will allow fees - up to a specific implementation.

Tokens are protected against attacks (even memory-related) because hackers have to perform the attack on a majority of nodes simultaneously (the property of blockchain).

Author: I added this to the document with a number of changes to try and make it easier to understand. Please confirm that I didn't mess it up.

Reviewer: Your version looks much better. I've added a couple of suggestions how to make it even easier to understand (in the new review).

### Drawbacks
[default-fee-handler-drawbacks]: #default-fee-handler-drawbacks

* Historically there were concerns about having payment functionality included in Hyperledger projects, but as distributed payments have become more mainstream, it now seems acceptable to include into Indy generic primitives related to payments.

> * The default fee handler will not perform the same validation on a historical transaction as was done in the removed plugin at the time that the transaction was originally completed. Therefore, it is most suitable for ledgers that do not make strong guarantees of historical validity, such as ledgers used for development and testing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The default fee handler will not perform validation at all. It will replay it in the same way as the plugin did.
```
> Therefore, it is most suitable for ledgers that do not make strong guarantees of historical validity, such as ledgers used for development and testing.

As far as I know, historical validity is the property of all ledgers.

Author: Excellent feedback. I reworded my comment, so hopefully it is now accurate.

Reviewer: Perfect

> * If auth_rules with fees are defined, but no plugin is installed to process them, the rules will fall back to the default fee handler and authorization will be granted. This permissive behavior could be dangerous in some circumstances, and network administrators should ensure that auth_rules do not rely on fees when no plugin is installed to handle them. This is consistent with other Indy configuration options which are permissive by default to assist new users, but expected to be locked down for production use.

Reviewer: > If auth_rules with fees are defined, but no plugin is installed to process them, the rules will fall back to the default fee handler and authorization will be granted.

Right, there will be no fee handler so rules will just be ignored. Just a note.

Author: This prompted me to try and clarify that sentence. Let me know if it is better or worse.

## Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Indy Plenum can be extended through the use of [ledger plugins](https://github.com/hyperledger/indy-plenum/blob/master/docs/source/plugins.md). Ledger plugins can introduce new transaction types that are either stored on existing ledgers, or on new ledgers created by the plugins. The [Sovrin Network](http://sovrin.org) used this capability to develop a [token plugin for Indy](https://github.com/sovrin-foundation/token-plugin) that stored fee and value transfer transactions on a token ledger. After experimenting with the plugin, [they decided to remove it](https://github.com/sovrin-foundation/sovrin-sip/tree/master/text/5005-token-removal/README.md).

Removing the plugin has three important consequences:
* The data stored on the custom ledger created by the plugin will be deleted.
* The audit ledger will no longer be able to obtain the root hash of any custom ledgers from the plugin.
* Any authorization rules (auth_rules) on the config ledger that define fees as being necessary to authorize writes to the domain ledger can no longer be handled by the plugin.

> The first consequence is intended. This HIPE proposes feature to address the remaining two consequences to ensure that the network remains functional after the plugin is removed.

Author: Good catch.

We include both features in the same HIPE because they share a common motivation and are likely to be used together.

## Frozen Ledgers
[frozen-ledgers]: #frozen-ledgers

### Tutorial
[frozen-ledgers-tutorial]: #frozen-ledgers-tutorial

> If a ledger has been created, but will never be used, it can be frozen. The LEDGERS_FREEZE transaction will record the root hashes of one or more ledgers, and perpetually use those hashes when computing audit ledger validity. This has two important advantages:

Author: This touches on two separate properties of our blockchain:
* The ability to achieve consensus when writing a new transaction to the ledger.
* The ability to audit the history of the ledger to prove that there was no tampering.

When a ledger is frozen, the root hash of the deprecated ledger is available to be used by the audit ledger when computing consensus. But we do not store the entire history of root hashes, so it does not help if someone tries to recompute a history that relies on the removed ledger. The proposed implementation of frozen ledgers only works for Sovrin because MainNet's token ledger was unused, and we don't guarantee historical reliability on StagingNet and BuilderNet.

I expanded on the explanation in the "Drawbacks" section to hopefully make that more clear.

> If a ledger has been created, but will never be used, it can be frozen. The LEDGERS_FREEZE transaction will record the root hashes of one or more ledgers, and perpetually use those hashes when computing audit ledger validity. This has two important advantages:

Reviewer 2: I'll take a look, thank you.

* It preserves the ability to do rolling updates. Without this capability, attempting to remove a plugin during a rolling update risks breaking consensus if a transaction is submitted to the ledger during the roll out period. This is because updated nodes would not be able to process new transactions that were ordered by the non-updated nodes. But if we freeze all ledgers associated with the plugin, we can do rolling updates because new transactions related to the plugin will be impossible.

> * It allows the removal of old plugins. Frozen ledgers can be removed and there will be no left over data from the removed plugin. The removal of old plugins will also help reduce the cost of keeping the network stable and secure.

Author: Yes, it exists in the freeze_ledgers transaction stored in the state tree (the state tree contains the most recent version of all transactions). This allows the hash to be used when the audit ledger is calculating consistency.

Freezing ledgers requires the following workflow:
* Upgrade all nodes to a version of Indy that supports frozen ledgers.
* Send a LEDGERS_FREEZE transaction for the ledgers that you want to drop.
* Upgrade all nodes to remove the plugin.
* Execute a migration script to drop the ledgers.

Permissions around the LEDGERS_FREEZE transaction are managed in the auth_rules with a default permission requiring the approval of three trustees ([the same default auth_rule for upgrading the ledger](https://github.com/hyperledger/indy-node/blob/master/docs/source/auth_rules.md)).

### Reference
[frozen-ledgers-reference]: #frozen-ledgers-reference

> If a ledger is frozen it can be used neither for reading nor for writing. It will not be caught up by new nodes and can be safely removed. Default ledgers such as the domain, config, pool, and audit ledgers cannot be frozen.

Author: Thoughts @Toktar ?

> If a ledger is frozen it can be used neither for reading nor for writing. It will not be caught up by new nodes and can be safely removed. Default ledgers such as the domain, config, pool, and audit ledgers cannot be frozen.

Reviewer 3: I added this error message for all client actions with a frozen ledger. But it's not a final solution and may be changed if you have suggestions.
```
InvalidClientRequest(request.identifier, request.reqId,
                                           "'{}' transaction is forbidden because of "
                                           "'{}' ledger is frozen".format(self.txn_type, self.ledger_id))
```

> If a ledger is frozen it can be used neither for reading nor for writing. It will not be caught up by new nodes and can be safely removed. Default ledgers such as the domain, config, pool, and audit ledgers cannot be frozen.

Author: Thank you @Toktar . I added the error messages to the HIPE.

### Rationale and alternatives
[frozen-ledgers-rationale-and-alternatives]: #frozen-ledgers-rationale-and-alternatives

We considered implementing the frozen ledger hash in a plugin, but we consider it a generally useful feature and believe it should belong in Indy.

### Prior art
[frozen-ledgers-prior-art]: #frozen-ledgers-prior-art

No relevant prior art.

### Unresolved questions
[frozen-ledgers-unresolved-questions]: #frozen-ledgers-unresolved-questions

All questions raised during the development of this proposal have been answered in this draft of the proposal.

## Default Fee Handlers
[default-fee-handler]: #default-fee-handler

### Tutorial
[default-fee-handler-tutorial]: #default-fee-handler-tutorial

[Indy Authorization Rules](https://github.com/hyperledger/indy-node/blob/master/docs/source/requests.md#auth_rule) provide a flexible way of authorizing write transactions to the domain ledger. This authorization can [depend on the payment of fees tracked by ledger plugins](https://github.com/sovrin-foundation/libsovtoken/blob/master/doc/fees.md).

> Because Indy currently has no native concept of fees, if a plugin that implemented fees is removed, historical transactions can no longer be validated and will prevent new nodes from catching up on the ledger. In many cases it is sufficient to know that the historical transactions were valid at the time of writing. In these cases a default fee handler can approve the historical transactions.

Reviewer 2: I think "Because Indy currently has no native concept of fees" this should be a separate HIPE. Fees seem like a side effect of the plugin architecture although documented.

Looking toward the future I think having a defined "fee handler architecture" in Indy is valuable, allowing other to extend it but supporting the current work done by sovrin.

Author: I took your advice and split this into its own HIPE.

### Reference
[default-fee-handler-reference]: #default-fee-handler-reference

> Implementation will require adding to Indy [the SET_FEE transaction copied from the sovtoken plugin](https://github.com/sovrin-foundation/token-plugin/blob/a635780361a7478ea4b2f47fcffee78b150fdea3/sovtokenfees/sovtokenfees/req_handlers/write_handlers/set_fees_handler.py#L20) and [a default fee handler copied from the sovtoken fee handler (FeesAuthorizer)](https://github.com/sovrin-foundation/token-plugin/blob/master/sovtokenfees/sovtokenfees/fees_authorizer.py#L26). The fee handler will have the validation logic replaced with `throw NotAllowedException()`.

Reviewer 2: SET_FEE and FeesAuthorizer seem like an independent HIPE to support generic fees?

Author: I took your advice and split it into its own HIPE.

## Default Fee Handlers
[default-fee-handler]: #default-fee-handler

### Tutorial
[default-fee-handler-tutorial]: #default-fee-handler-tutorial

[Indy Authorization Rules](https://github.com/hyperledger/indy-node/blob/master/docs/source/requests.md#auth_rule) provide a flexible way of authorizing write transactions to the domain ledger. This authorization can [depend on the payment of fees tracked by ledger plugins](https://github.com/sovrin-foundation/libsovtoken/blob/master/doc/fees.md).

Because Indy currently has no native concept of fees, if a plugin that implemented fees is removed, historical transactions can no longer be validated and will prevent new nodes from catching up on the ledger. In many cases it is sufficient to know that the historical transactions were valid at the time of writing. In these cases a default fee handler can approve the historical transactions.

### Reference
[default-fee-handler-reference]: #default-fee-handler-reference

The default fee handler will be a copy of [the sovtoken fee handler (FeesAuthorizer)](https://github.com/sovrin-foundation/token-plugin/blob/master/sovtokenfees/sovtokenfees/fees_authorizer.py#L26) with the validation disabled.

> Any transaction handler consists of two parts: validation logic (static and dynamic) and business logic.
> 
> For fee transactions, transaction validation will be performed on new transactions, but no validation will be performed during the catchup process. This is because the transaction is already on the ledger, so we know that validation was already performed and we don't need to do it again. By copying the handler and disabling validation, it will allow catchup but will not allow new transactions with fees.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any transaction handler consists of two parts: validation logic (static and dynamic) and business logic. Validation is performed on new transactions, but no validation is performed during the catchup process. By copying the handler and disabling validation, it will allow catchup but will not allow new transactions with fees.
```

Author: I get it now. You are saying that every transaction handler skips validation on catch-up (it isn't specific to the fee handler). I didn't understand that before. I've updated the text to be more accurate. Thank you.

> Business logic for fee related transactions will continue to be determined by the auth_rules and logic implemented in a plugin which defines a payment implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Business logic for fee related transactions will continue to be determined by the default handler. An implementation of plugin should unlock fee transactions and define a payment implementation.
```

Author: Hopefully I got this right this time.

Reviewer: Let let me dive into technical details a bit more. That's how I see this:

We have SET_FEE transaction and the corresponding handler in the plugin. Handler consists of two parts: validation logic and execution logic. After moving the handler to the node validation logic will be replaced with `throw NotAllowedException()`. The new plugin should:
1. Override default fee handler and replace validation logic with a real one. Execution logic must be kept the same, otherwise, catchup will be broken. That's what I mean by `unlocking fee transactions`. So new fee transactions will be allowed.
2. Implement token transactions like, for example, EMIT_TOKENS, TRANSFER_TOKENS and so on.
3. Implement the logic that will reduce the transaction's author balance if the transaction has a fee defined.

By `defining a payment implementation` I understand items 2 and 3.
